# lisa
machine generated

## build / install
are you on linux? `make` will probably work. otherwise, see
`Makefile` for the suggested compiler flags.

## usage

lisa is alive, so unstable. usage is schemelike, but
relaxed. `#f` = `()` = `0`. special forms have short
names and use less parentheses. pairs are immutable and
eagerly cons'd, so acyclic. improper list literals are
absent.

special form examples compared to scheme:

| scheme                     | lisa        |
|----------------------------|-------------|
|`(begin a b)`               |`(, a b)`    |
|`(lambda - #f)`             |`(\)`        |
|`(lambda - a)`              |`(\ a)`      |
|`(lambda (a) b)`            |`(\ a b)`    |
|`(lambda (a b) c)`          |`(\ a b c)`  |
|`(lambda (a . b) c)`        |`(\ a b . c)`|
|`(begin (define a b) a)`    |`(: a b)`    |
|`(begin (define a b) c)`    |`(: a b c)`  |
|`(cond (a b) (#t #f))`      |`(? a b)`    |
|`(cond (a b) (#t c))`       |`(? a b c)`  |
|`(cond (a b) (c d) (#t #f))`|`(? a b c d)`|

etc.

## code examples

### an autograph
```lisp
; also called a quine
((\ - (L - (L ` -))) '(\ - (L - (L ` -))))
```

### hyperoperation sequence
```lisp
(: (hy x n y) ( ? (~ n) (+ x y) (~ y) 1
 (hy x (- n 1) (hy x n (- y 1)))))
```

### church numerals

church numerals reflect the identity of whole numbers as completed
degrees of repetition. a geometric interpretation comes from euler's
identity, where integers are the solutions `n` of `1 = e ^ n * i * pi`,
the value pi taken to be twice that normally given. this formula
defines a function whose image over integers is `{1}`, which is the
property used in the following definition of zero, and corresponds to
the usual church encoding for the false boolean `\ _ x -> x = const id`.
the function asks of `n`, does going around a circle this many times
bring us back to the original point? if it does, it's interchangeable
with 0, forming part of the kernel, while the remaining reals are folded
into quotients over `(0, pi)`, pi again taken to be approximately 44/7,
and mapped back onto the rest of the unit circle.

to form church numerals, we use lambda expressions as elements of
an abelian monoid `N = 0 + succ N`. hyperoperations appear as complexity
classes of self-actions of `N` via `M`, the monoid of endomorphisms on `N`
generated by `succ`. by construction, `M` is `N`'s image under `succ`,
and forms a second abelian monoid under `1 = succ 0`. the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic maps `N` onto `M` through the factorizing
homomorphism `f` whose kernel is `{0, 1}`.

this paints a dramatic picture. the polymorphism `f` floods `N`; the
receding waters reveal `M`, in privation of its former identity, yet
holding a second within its nature, as if by chance. a rainbow appears:
a bridge back to the origin made of `M`'s infinite generators. the
bridge is endless, and the toll to pass is unlimited attention paid to
the image we wish to repair.

as an attempt to formalize this intuition, imagine a point at infinity
in `N ^ N` representing a quantity `z` congruent to 0 mod all `N`: the
product of infinite copies of every prime `p`: a quantity so large as
to be inexpressible by finite combinations of its predecessors, and
hence appearing uniquely identical to all of them. by conjecture, each
`p` is now the neutral element of a new monoid `Np = p + Np ^ z`. since
by construction `a ^ b = b a`, this means `p` and `z` assume the place
of 0 and `succ` in the original equation for `N`. the impression received
is that primes are unique among integers due to a property they share
with 0, distinct from one and all composites: points of void crystallized
under the aspect of form.

```lisp
(:
 ; zero is the constant function at the identity function
 zero (\ (\ - -))
 ; a successor applies its argument then yields to its predecessor
 (((succ f) g) h) ((f g) (g h))

 one (succ zero) ; \ f -> f = identity
 two (succ one) ; \ f -> f . f = square
 three (succ two) ; \ f -> f . f . f = cube 

 ; binary operations follow from succ:
 ((add g) f)         ; the monoid on N
  ((f succ) g)       ; \ g f x -> f x . g x
 ((mul g) f)         ; the monoid on End(N)
  ((f (add g)) zero) ; \ g f x -> f (g x)

 ; the rest are iterations of the "up arrow" map:
 (((up op) g) f) ((f (op g)) one)
 ; these operations fail to be abelian or even associative,
 ; which makes the compatibility of the first two seem
 ; special and miraculous.
 pow (up mul) ; exponentiation ; \ f -> f = one ; this also feels significant
 tet (up pow) ; tetration, etc.

 (C n) (? n (succ (C (- n 1))) zero) ; fixnum -> N
 (N c) ((c (\ x (+ x 1))) 0))        ; N -> fixnum
```

### fizzbuzz

```lisp
(: (/p m n) (~ (% m n))
   (fizzbuzz m)
    ((\ (+ m 1)) (. (?
     (/p m 15) 'fizzbuzz
     (/p m 5)  'buzz
     (/p m 3)  'fizz
     m)))
 ((((pow ((mul ((add three) two)) two)) two) fizzbuzz) 1))
```
